---
title: THE GRAND LYRICIST
weight: 201
image: fig-1-22-portraitofbischoff.png
type: entry
---
Elmer Bischoff delighted in the magic of brushwork and pigment, and the power of a painting to strike chords deep in the viewer's consciousness.

<!--more-->

Susan Landauer, formerly chief curator at the San José Museum of Art, met Bischoff in 1985 while she was a graduate student at Yale and in 2001 published the first substantial monograph exploring his life achievements, entitled The Ethics of Paint, in which she relays his ambition to arrive at a wholly encompassing painterly vision-what he himself called "totality."

Bischoff was born in 1916 in Berkeley, California. His father was a builder, and his mother a homemaker. To his mother's delight, Bischoff was quick to learn the violin as a young boy and later the piano, which he played by ear. Ultimately it was the sound and feel of the trumpet, an instrument Bischoff picked up after his service in the United States Air Force, that afforded him the most joy and inspiration throughout his life, especially jazz trumpet. It paired seamlessly with his love of expressionistic figure painting, which dissolved form into light and dealt with a kindred sort of movement.

Painting was Bischoff's greatest passion. He graduated from the University of California in Berkeley with a bachelor's and master's degree in art in 1939 and spoke of the San Francisco Art Institute (SFAI; then the California School of Fine Arts), where he joined other philosophically-inclined soldiers returning from World War II, in religious terms as a "brotherhood composed of members recently liberated from a world of semidarkness." Bischoff began to teach drawing and painting at SFAI in 1946 and had his first one-man show in 1947. But it was not until he began painting figuratively in 1952 that he achieved mythic status as the second of San Francisco's Abstract Expressionists, after David Park, to defect from the movement's insistence on non-representation. Curator Paul Mills immortalized Park, Bischoff, and Richard Diebenkorn as leaders of "Bay Area Figurative Painting" in a 1957 exhibition at the Oakland Museum of California (then the Oakland Art Museum). What was most desired by the Figuratives, says Bischoff, "is a condition of form which dissolves all tangible facts into intangibles of feeling."
