---
title: NEW DRAWINGS
type: entry
weight: 204
image: fig-1-30-newdrawingsexhibitionposter.png
---
The figurative turn in Bay Area art meant turning from the abstract expression of one's subconscious to face the world of stimuli and draw from the model again.

<!--more-->

At an early age, Bischoff showed an interest and aptitude for drawing. Two of his uncles did cartooning as an occasional hobby. While serving as an intelligence officer in the United States Air Force during World War II, he occasionally tried a few sketches or drawings. But the brutal violence of warfare dampened his creative drive. On his release from active duty, he returned to life drawing along with figurative painting as mediums for introspective viewing. Art historian Donald Kuspit notes that, "he frequently depicted females, as though they understand more fully what it is to be inwardly alone-as though they are more capable of introspective awareness-than men."

For Bischoff, even though many of his nude models seem radically alone, a good life drawing was one that also provided its subject with an environment they could live in. He consistently participated in weekly drawing sessions and discussions with his contemporaries, to compare one another's observations of objects in a picture plane and to explore how everything works together to form a whole. When he first joined the faculty at the San Francisco Art Institute (SFAI) in 1946, Bischoff regularly got together with Hassel Smith and Richard Diebenkorn for vigorous drawing sessions he likened to "workouts at the gym." When he returned to SFAI for the second time in 1956, he began attending Wednesday evening drawing sessions that Theophilus Brown, Richard Diebenkorn, David Park, and Paul Wonner had initiated with a shifting roster of artists-including SJMA artists Frank Lobdell and Joan Brown-usually at the 2571 Shattuck Avenue complex where several of them and eventually Bischoff himself had studios. In 1959, Bischoff invited Lobdell to take the place of Park in a more intimate Thursday night drawing session; Park had withdrawn because of failing health. In the late 1960s, when Bischoff began teaching at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB), he again initiated a weekly Friday breakfast meeting with Sidney Gordin and other members of the art faculty, some of who would bring work to share with the group. The group grew increasingly large, and was eventually called The Berkeley Artists Breakfast Club. Many of Bischoff's students at UCB recall an incredible presence and stillness about him. He was incredibly supportive of their deep immersion in the relationship of the figure to its environment.
