---
title: A KIND OF TOGETHERNESS
type: entry
weight: 205
image: fig-1-26-madcowcommunications-berkeleyartistbreakfastclub.jpg
---
After years of acclaim for his figurative painting, in his late career Bischoff returned to explore a more immediate, relational, and abstract style.

<!--more-->

When he first joined the faculty at the San Francisco Art Institute in 1946, the school had been energized by war-hardened GIs and the allure of the Abstract Expressionist movement, which offered a way out of the strict disciplinary norms of the armed forces and a release of strong or repressed emotions. Then director Douglas MacAgy designed a program to encourage radical expressions of individual freedom. He allowed studios to be open twenty-four hours a day and organized raucous parties with live music by the faculty's Studio 13 Jazz Band (Bischoff played trumpet, MacAgy played drums).

Under MacAgy's tenure in the postwar era, SFAI became the beacon of Abstract Expressionism on the West Coast; although, some artists recall his wife, Jermayne MacAgy, a vanguard curator who promoted the San Francisco School at the Legion of Honor, was the more influential. During this time, Bischoff painted in a variety of abstract styles. Critic Alfred Frankenstein referred to his Surrealist-inspired paintings from 1946 as "beautifully and subtly handled studies of twirling, strutting, and flying forms." The following year, he increased the scale of his canvases and brutalized his handling of paint with heat and speed. His criteria for good painting in the late 1940s and early 1950s was ugly rather than beautiful, and raw rather than polished. The Untitled painting in the permanent collection of the San Jose Museum of Art from Bischoff's early period of abstraction has what he described as a "thrashing, scratching, sportive line."

The appeal of abstraction for Bischoff in the late 1970s was the paring down of painting's sensual and relational qualities. Works produced in this late period do not convey his personal emotions in as much as they convey the will of small individual images in a state of dynamic and joyful interaction bordering on anarchy. He would be delighted if the hop and energy of these late paintings were to inspire someone to dance or sing. He desired for them to have a more immediate connection with viewers than the figurative paintings that preceded this phase. The shapes, lines, and squiggles have an outward-moving willingness to participate with one another in a coherent kind of togetherness.
