---
title: LIFE IS RUTH’S ART
weight: 101
image: fig-1-2-asawa-asawaworking.jpg
type: entry
---
Ruth Asawa insisted that the whole of her life experience was a work of art. Like a bulb in the ground, she felt that she was growing and that she should be doing something every second that she was attached to this earth.

<!--more-->

Ruth Asawa insisted that the whole of her life experience was a work of art. Like a bulb in the ground, she felt that she was growing and that she should be doing something every second that she was attached to this earth. Born in 1926 in Norwalk, California, a small agricultural town in Los Angeles County, she was the fourth of seven children. Her family worked in sugar beets and leased a “truck farm” in Norwalk until 1942 when President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order No. 9066 authorizing the internment of more than 120,000 people of Japanese descent during World War II. Asawa had earned praise for drawing at a young age, and continued drawing under the mentorship of professional artists in the internment camps.  
<br>
Black Mountain College, where Asawa began experimenting with galvanized wire as an artistic medium, influenced her whole approach to making art. By the late 1950s, she established a signature abstract style working in crocheted wire and became the first Asian-American woman to earn recognition in the male-dominated field of postwar modern sculpture. Asawa and her husband Albert Lanier, an architect whom she met at Black Mountain, raised six children in San Francisco, California where she also became one of the City’s foremost advocates for arts education. The Ruth Asawa San Francisco School for the Arts is a public arts high school that grew out of her tireless campaign to support arts programming that would empower children and communities, beginning with an experimental arts workshop at Alvarado Elementary School that Asawa co-founded with art historian Sally Woodbridge in 1968.

{{< q-figure id="1.4" >}}
