---
title: ARCHITECTURAL WORKS
type: entry
weight: 104
image: fig-1-7-ruthandalbertathome.JPG
---
While studying at Black Mountain College, Asawa met an architecture student named Albert Lanier. They married and settled in San Francisco in 1949.

<!--more-->

Imogen Cunningham, an acclaimed portrait photographer affiliated with Group f.64 who was a close friend of Asawa and Lanier, regarded them as two people who were free from each other and yet with each other. She says they both had work to do and work is the thing that makes everybody live properly.

The Group of Architectural Works in SJMA's collection demonstrates that Asawa and Lanier did influence one another's thinking. When Asawa first exhibited a long-lobed wire sculpture at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in 1950, there was some debate about whether or not the work was sculpture because it could not stand up by itself. Neither could it be classified as a drawing, despite Asawa's ruminations on the economy of line. The seemingly weightless airy form suspended from the ceiling of the gallery was an indefinite object that challenged and redefined those categories. Yet, the more fitting description of this type of work is architectural because Asawa created long lobes in proportion to the body and the built environment. Photographs of these works on display in private homes and offices show how they gracefully exist in the spaces they are hung, drawing attention to the form of both inner and outer space. As an architect in San Francisco, Lanier also created simple, harmonious spaces filled with natural light. Billy Bondy, who worked for him in the 1980s, remembers how, "He would tear down walls and flowingly connect the internal space of his houses with the outdoors."

Working in San Francisco for more than 60 years, Asawa continued to experiment in painting, drawing, printing, tied-wire sculpture, paper-folding, casting, and public art. She even corresponded with A. Donham Owen Law Offices between 1956-1959 with ambitions to patent an industrial design for plastic-molded paneling based on a paper fold.
