---
title: A JAPANESE AMERICAN INTERNMENT MEMORIAL FOR THE CITY OF SAN JOSÉ
type: entry
weight: 105
image: fig-1-13-sjmemorialproposal.jpg
---
<br>
<br>
In July 1983, the San José City Council appointed a fifteen-member commission to study the experience of San José's Japanese community during World War II and the immediate postwar years.

<!--more-->

During the course of its work, the Commission also began working with the Japanese community in preparation for a public monument in honor of the evacuees who beginning in 1941 lost their liberty and were denied justice for the duration of the war. In visualizing the story of San José's Japanese residents, all can know what happened and ensure that neither the Japanese nor any other group of Americans will ever suffer similarly.

When Ruth Asawa presented her proposal for a Japanese-American Internment Memorial in August 1990, she recalled her own experience in the small agricultural town of Norwalk, California "having to face fellow students at a high school assembly on December 8, 1941, where our principal asked the student body to exercise tolerance and understanding, to the removal of my father by the FBI, and then our later removal to a camp that was hastily built over a cotton field in Rohwer, Arkansas. The disruption and disorientation (and novel experiences) that my family went through from the end of 1941 to the end of the war is the story of almost every Japanese American family who lived and worked on the West Coast."

Asawa stressed the importance of creating a direct and simple narrative monument so that any viewer of any present or future generation can understand the story of internment with minimal explanation. Likewise, the "mon" or family crests that frame the narrative add a sense of history, tradition, and continuity in a direct and simple way. Assisted by artist Nancy Thompson and her youngest son Paul Lanier, among others, Asawa produced two large panels in bronze, which today stand as a 5x14-foot double-sided monument reinforced in stone in the East plaza fronting the Federal Building in downtown San José. More than 200 people gathered on March 5, 1994 to see the unveiling and dedication, including then San José Mayor Susan Hammer, Congressman Norman Mineta, SJMA board member Dr. Jerrold Hiura, civil rights activist Fred Korematsu who in 1942 refused the U.S. government's interment order and appealed his case all the way to the Supreme Court.

{{< q-figure id="1.15" >}}
{{< q-figure id="1.16" >}}
{{< q-figure id="1.20" >}}
